[Music]
[Applause]
hello and welcome to another episode of
what happened the show where hey
remember last forever last week when I
said the show that's not profiled the
single Nintendo published games since oh
[__] ever it's almost like I planned
this stuff one thing can certainly say
about Nintendo is that they usually have
a very high bar quality on a polished
technical level yes some aspects might
be divisive you'd wish some characters
and franchises would get their time to
shine again but for the most part what
they make is usually solid there's been
only a few scant times in the past
decade where collectively everyone can
point their fingers at a Nintendo
publish game and say yeah that's that's
not very good
doubles third is certainly one of those
times now there's a lot to unpack with
this story but first let me be clear
Nintendo did not in any way develop this
weird pastiche of a hack and slash and
shooting there was simply the company
that wound up having to publish it
because whoa
damn [__] crappy crap a whole lot of
companies did not want to publish it it
took roughly eight years I didn't
stutter eight years for doubles third to
become a product you could buy with
legal tender and yeah that's uh that's
how what happened right there as to who
developed this infamous bit of software
well that would be Valhalla game studios
and more specifically Toba Nobu EDA gaki
and more specifically than that the
Japanese Tommy was so all right set the
clock back now aside from the fact that
I just said that more importantly why
did I say it well a lot of the
information about Devil's thurb comes
from an interview an interview between
EDA Jackie and polygon and it's one of
the most batshit insane piece
of text ever committed to digital paper
your ever going to read he goes on and
on and on about nothing most of the time
making weird-ass analogies and
outlandish claims about game sales
reviews and life in general
it's a goddamn journey I'll tell you
that for free so with that disclaimer
out of the way let's slice and dice into
one of the worst reviewed lowest selling
games of 2015 the Nintendo was basically
shamed into publishing eda gaki was of
course the infamous director or general
as he fancies himself of team ninja a
group within techno that always seemed
to be as concerned with making forty
second long intros for themselves as
they were about making games in the
early 2000s they decided to shack up
with Big Daddy gates delivering
exclusive games on Microsoft's og
machine for a number of years this
lasted until EDA gaki suddenly left
techno in 2008 citing creative
differences or he got bored orbit sexual
harassment charges regardless he decided
to set up Valhalla most likely because
he still wanted a cool long intro that
showed stormy weather and took a number
of producers and designers from Team
Ninja along with him now since he was on
such good terms of Microsoft they were
the first logical burning oil drum in
which he could warm his hands by
Microsoft even issued their own personal
statement on the split between he and
Tecmo toga Nobu EDA gaki has decided to
leave techmount and Team Ninja to pursue
other opportunities we thanked Oba Nobu
EDA gawky for the many years he has
supported the Xbox as he has contributed
immensely to the success of the
videogame industry as a whole now it's
not every day a company who does not
employ a particular person still makes a
statement on that person's change in
position imagine when cookie B had to
announce his company was a huge failure
and he had to close it and then all of a
sudden Nintendo is like oh man yeah
super rob do yo wish you luck Opie's so
with that small gesture it's easy to see
why Microsoft would want to snap up
eating a key so he'd make them some cold
hard Japanese action
games or like some some bouncy soft
creepy Japanese boyar games the thing is
though when Valhalla was all set up and
eating a ki was ready to talk Turkey and
ask Uncle Bill to open up his checkbook
something unexpected happened
Microsoft was out of [__] to give for
any game that was unsuited to have a
bright purple Kinect sticker on its box
yeah despite those heartfelt words from
Microsoft they actually turned down
eating Aki's proposal and Microsoft had
switched to the controller free
revolution which lasted like two years
so yes they weren't really an option
anymore
but you know who was desperately trying
to pivot their entire business model in
the last-ditch effort to avoid
bankruptcy after their own similar what
happened with the you drop tablet that's
right THQ and boy at that point they'd
greenlight anything they could to get
away from the stinky childlike stink of
their previous 20 years of business even
if they couldn't afford to this resulted
in the tragic cancellation of things
like a bunch of Finnish Saints Row games
your model taro is insane and probably
some other cool [__] we don't even know
about under THQ is when the game started
to take shape and even produce the first
trailer which in all honesty might have
done a bit more harm than good in the
long run it was formally announced in
the summer of 2010 and what we see here
seems to be eight stylish action game
with multiple characters seems like it
could be some type of multiplayer thing
yeah
this seems like what an e-tag Accu would
make speaking of which he even managed
to squeeze his own quote into the
announcement as well who would have
thought in the past I created four
unique games dead or alive in ja'kayden
DOA extreme and Ninja Gaiden Dragon
Sword that's that's being really
generous anyway
he then said thus this announcement will
be the fifth all-new project of my
lifetime my heart pounds with
anticipation every time I make this
announcement it's not something I get
used to complacency is never an option
for me
okay Compton tits buddy is
gee
[Music]
anyway work continued on the game for a
further two years with absolutely no
updates until May of 2012 or THQ
announced that yeah things were going
poorly apparently an outside third party
had been supplying the engine for the
game but was never explicitly named and
that company just went out of business
for some reason you might want to chalk
this one up to an act of God since it
was out of Valhalla and THQ control but
no it's actually just called bad
business teach Q's Brian Ferrill stated
that the profitability of Devils third
was not competitive with our other
releases and that's probably because
firstly they'd have to find a new engine
which cost time and money and secondly
the yen was gaining in value over the
American dollar at that point further
decreasing the game's prospects th Q's
head of hardcore gaming Danny Bilson was
a big fan of the project and saw the
potential in it who worked behind the
scenes to still try to make it happen
who is at this time when they decided
for now to switch the whole game over to
the Phoenix engine no not that Phoenix
which was a custom havoc based bit of
Tech and was also what the then-upcoming
Darksiders 2 ran on another year passed
before THQ announced to the world who
already knew that yes their anus was
bleeding and they have no way to plug it
up so please help them for God's sake
but no one really came to the rescue and
instead a multitude of publishers simply
swooped in and picked the carcass of THQ
clean with Nordic games leaving with the
fullest belly what the hell is this the
best
but of all those franchises that found a
home though doubles third was the odd
game out and instead of going to the
warm loving embrace of a new mama or
Papa the rights to the franchise
reverted back to Valhalla game studios
who could then do what they wanted with
us in the polygon interviewee 2 gawky
states that this was a difficult time
that Danny Bilson still had his back how
long was it when you sign with THQ until
THQ closed as a company I don't know I'm
a mathematician but I'm no good at
counting but I worked with Danny until
the very end even after THQ closed
that's why he's at the very beginning of
the staff credit so Devils third so left
with an unfinished game engine and no
publisher was back to the races to find
someone who could get this thing to
market enter a company you've never
heard of do big entertainment world they
were a South Korean publisher who had
experienced with FPSs and promised EDA
gaki they would get the game onto PCs
and mobile platforms for some reason
within the next fiscal year but before
all that they had something to take care
of and that was going out of business
ah you can make this this is doing the
show mmm anyway left with an unfinished
game engine and no publisher it was back
to the races to get this thing to market
it is now 2014 Valhalla game Studios is
still somehow in business I mean I think
business is a strong word because you
actually need to produce a thing or
provide some type of service to be in
business ideally but because like since
their founding in 2008 they have
released zero titles eight years no
games how is that possible you ask don't
even ask
okay for real though when you have no
money coming in like at all how do you
keep a company with multiple employees
afloat well polygon was curious about
the same thing so how are you able to
keep the company going through that
period of time that must be one of the
seven wonders of the world it's through
determination and honesty to each other
as you can see in this picture of our
team we are all happy all of us believe
that we are going to make something
great and a savior would always come
along this is a picture of us in China
with my sensei lege Matsumoto
we have big supporters in China Russia
the US Canada and elsewhere who stepped
up to help us what does that mean eita
gaki did you do have some side hustles
going on are you importing jeans from
Korea where's that paper coming from
regardless it was at that year's e3
where a Nintendo made a surprise
announcement one of their treehouse
streams doubles third was back it had a
new look or like I guess this was the
first look at it technically and it was
a we Hugh exclusive it was shocking you
know maybe not bayonetta too shocking
but it did surprise the niche number of
fans who even remember what Devil's
third was eating a key recalls how this
all went down after THQ closed Valhalla
CEO Satoshi kena mat-su approached
Satoru Iwata and Nintendo and they
picked up the game the reason why
Nintendo picked up the game is that they
don't have enough strong online titles
devil's third is not a game that
Nintendo can make internally so we came
in as their mercenaries to make a strong
online game okay yeah sure dude anyway
fans were still taken aback at the game
because it was quite different from the
emitted Lee
light on substance trailer that have
been released years ago under THQ that
version of it seemed to employ maybe
parkour and melee combat into a
multiplayer setting who has never really
stated whereas now the games seem to
have been turned into a standard single
player action game like a lot of team
ninjas previous efforts and featured a
separate multiplayer component the
campaign was entirely focused on a
Russian mercenary named Ivan whose task
was saving the world from falling
satellite debris or something to do so
he'll have to utilize either his clunky
FPS shooting mechanics or his clunky
melee mechanics to take down frustrating
level after frustrating level oh and
there's bats - lots of bats while people
were happy that the game had been
resurrected they were less happy at this
change of gameplay style and were even
less happy than then at the idea of it
being a Wii U exclusive which was the
style at the time but it just so
happened that Nintendo were the only
ones willing to publish it i I mean
Nintendo of Japan were the only ones
willing to publish it so we're coming
upon the final hurdle in this sad
journey of devils third Nintendo of
America seemed to hate the game this was
a deal that was brokered by their
counterparts in Japan
so when builds were sent to Nintendo HQ
in Redmond Washington I can only imagine
what they thought of it it now ran on
Unreal Engine 3 not very well it did
mind you it was glitchy had awful
textures poor controls input lag was
just plain ugly and by 2014 standards
was not all that exciting the play
Japanese action games and how even
Western third-person shooters had kind
of pushed beyond what eda gaki had been
making in 2008 so Devils third was now
frantically trying to play catch-up
already put in a difficult position by
the previous company closures and engine
changes who is the one other facet that
Valhalla failed to consider their piece
of software had been trapped in this
bubble of unreleased scene for almost a
decade with many trends technology and
innovations completely passing them by
III 2014 came and went without any
further updates
Nintendo failed to mention the game at
all derp
the following III people began to
suspect something was up every [__]
in this place knows I'm working for you
might be a few minutes it was then where
a proverbial ping-pong match between the
media and Nintendo began one side
claimed one thing while the other
deflected the game was canceled no it's
not
you're not publishing it we never said
we were so where is it it's coming when
I don't know it came to a head when Noa
simply stated that they were seeking out
another publishing partner for doubles
third in North America because they
would not be handling those duties
problem with them is that Nintendo
couldn't find anyone else to handle
those duties why well two reasons a Wii
U exclusive was a tough sell in 2015 so
yeah there's that and to those potential
publishers probably played it
[Music]
with no takers Nintendo knowing that the
small but vocal fanbase still cared
about Devils third wouldn't let them
live it down if they didn't release the
game especially since the Japanese and
European French has had so nintendo
basically just threw their hands and
gave up they relented made it available
as a download and shipped physical
copies all 10,000 or less of them and
just like Nintendo predicted the
critical reception was similarly abysmal
with many review outlets citing it as
one of the worst games of the year and
considerably lowered Nintendo's own
Metacritic score in the process
what did etag ackee think of all those
harsh reviews wow the reviews for Devils
third weren't stellar the general view
was that the game was stuck in the late
xbox360 era let me try to explain this
in parts first the reason the reviews
were so poor I have analyzed the reason
the game was designed to be a massive
shooter so it would be fun if there are
at least a thousand players in the game
but Nintendo they didn't set up online
matches for reviewers so there is no way
for reviewers to experience the online
mode as we designed it and they reviewed
the game based mostly on the
single-player story mode if it had been
Microsoft that published the game they
would have given the game to a group of
500 players who had signed an NDA to
play for the reviewers to experience the
massive online mode but Noa didn't do
that which is of course a bunch of
[__] in fact the little praised
Devils third did get was because of the
in-depth multiplayer which featured tons
of characters gear maps and modes it was
still a bit janky but there was a lot of
content however the game's campaign was
so maligned what with the poor
optimization voice acting controls
graphics levels and general gameplay
that reviewers were left with no choice
but to score the game accordingly it
Gehrke's seems to have never addressed
this and instead focuses his criticisms
elsewhere they couldn't play the
multiplayer so there's no value to the
review of someone who's evaluating a
piece of art with blindfolds on that was
95% of the negative criticism towards
the game note wasn't the remaining 5%
was by people who wanted to build
credibility by criticizing the game one
person wrote a negative review and
and away didn't do anything to stop or
change that review so others followed
suit so I don't really believe that the
reviews were credible what you just said
is one of the most insanely idiotic
things I have ever heard anyway Nintendo
pulled the plug on the game servers less
than a year later which honestly was
probably longer than it deserved with
that being said the games chunky
multiplayer mode technically got another
chance in the spotlight because it was
cut out of the single-player game and
sold as a separate SKU on PCs in Japan
published by Nexon and dubbed devil's
third online which yeah I don't think
you can play and I'd be surprised if it
still works
that'll happened in 2016 since then what
does Valhalla worked on nothing
absolutely nothing I think it seems like
another team with ties to them called
soleil might have made Naruto shinobi
strike or the earthing I mean I don't
know yet they're still operational
Valhalla I guess out of all of eating
Aki's friends across Russia China and
Canada they're still helping them
speaking of Canada there's wheat there's
also Valhalla games Studio Vancouver and
it's actually now their headquarters I
can't I can't anymore with this done
tapping out while you think of any other
mystifying misfires you'd like me to
cover in the future write them in the
comments check out the patreon and I'll
leave you with one more parting word
from her sunglass wearing god of oatmeal
cookies himself when asked about the
future of Valhalla and what platforms et
gaki is hoping to target for future
releases he calmly replied I think that
the future is stormy it's difficult to
see beyond that
see you next time and thanks for
watching
[Music]